<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<section version="5.0"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook http://docbook.org/xml/5.0/xsd/docbook.xsd"
         xml:id="scene_objects.surface_mesh"
         xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
         xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
         xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
         xmlns:ns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook">
  <title>Surface mesh</title>

  <para>
		This type of <link linkend="pipelines.data_objects">data object</link> is a triangle mesh represeting a surface or, more precisely, a two-dimensional manifold that is closed and orientable.
	  Typically, surface meshes are produced by modifiers such as <link linkend="particles.modifiers.construct_surface_mesh">Construct surface mesh</link>,
		<link linkend="particles.modifiers.create_isosurface">Create isosurface</link> or <link linkend="particles.modifiers.coordination_polyhedra">Coordination polyhedra</link>.
  </para>
  <para>
		The appearance of the surface mesh is controlled by the corresponding <link linkend="display_objects.surface_mesh">surface mesh visual element</link>.
  </para>
  <simplesect>
    <title>Periodic domains</title>
    <para>
			What is special about surface meshes is that they may be embedded in periodic domains, i.e. simulation cells with periodic boundary conditions.
			That means triangles of a surface mesh can connect vertices on opposite sides of a simulation box and wrap around correctly.
			OVITO takes care of computing the intersections of the periodic surface with the box boundaries and automatically produces a non-periodic representation of the triangle mesh
			when it comes to visualizing the surface.
    </para>
  </simplesect>
  <simplesect>
    <title>Interior and exterior region</title>
    <para>
			As surface meshes are closed orientable manifolds, one can define an <emphasis>interior</emphasis> and an <emphasis>exterior</emphasis> region of
      space that are separated by the surface manifold. For example, if the surface mesh was constructed by the <link linkend="particles.modifiers.construct_surface_mesh">Construct surface mesh</link> modifier
      from a set of particles, then the region enclosed by the surface represents the "solid" region and the outside region is the one containing no particles.
    </para>
    <para>
			Sometimes there is no interior region and the exterior region is infinite and fills all space. In this case the surface mesh is degenerate and
			consists of no triangles. The opposite extreme is also possible in periodic domains: The interior region extends over the entire periodic domain
			and there is no outside region. Again, the surface mesh will consist of zero triangles in this case.
    </para>
  </simplesect>
  <simplesect>
    <title>Data export</title>
    <para>
			A surface mesh can be exported from OVITO in the form of a conventional triangle mesh.
			For this, a non-periodic version is produced by truncating triangles at the domain boundaries and generating "cap polygons" to fill the holes that
			occur at the intersection of the interior region with the domain boundaries. To export the mesh, use OVITO's <link linkend="usage.export">file export function</link>
			and select the <emphasis>VTK</emphasis> output format.
    </para>
  </simplesect>

  <simplesect>
    <title>See also</title>
    <para>
        <pydoc-link href="modules/ovito_data" anchor="ovito.data.SurfaceMesh"><classname>SurfaceMesh</classname> (Python API)</pydoc-link>
    </para>
  </simplesect>

</section>
