<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<chapter version="5.0"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook http://docbook.org/xml/5.0/xsd/docbook.xsd"
         xml:id="installation" xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
         xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
         xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
         xmlns:ns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook">
  <title>Installation</title>

    <para>
      Binary program packages of OVITO for Linux, Windows, and macOS
      can be downloaded from <link xlink:href="https://www.ovito.org/">www.ovito.org</link>.
    </para>

    <simplesect xml:id="installation.requirements">
      <title>Requirements</title>
      <para>
        OVITO requires a 64-bit operating system and runs on processors with x86-64 architecture.
        The graphical user interface of OVITO requires 3D graphics hardware with support for the <link xlink:href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenGL">OpenGL</link> programming interface (OpenGL 2.1 or newer). 
        In general it is recommended that you install the latest graphics driver provided by your hardware vendor before running OVITO as some older drivers may not fully support modern OpenGL specifications,
        which can lead to compatibility problems.
      </para>
    </simplesect>

    <simplesect>
      <title>Installation steps</title>

      <variablelist>
        <varlistentry>
          <term>Linux:</term>
          <listitem>
            <para>
              Extract the downloaded <filename>.tar.xz</filename> archive file using the <link xlink:href="https://www.computerhope.com/unix/utar.htm"><command>tar</command> command</link>, e.g.: <command>tar xJfv ovito-3.0.0-x86_64.tar.xz</command>.
              This will create a new subdirectory containing the program files.
              Change into that directory and start OVITO by running the executable <command>./bin/ovito</command>.
            </para>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>

        <varlistentry>
          <term>Windows:</term>
          <listitem>
            <para>
              Run the installer program <filename>ovito-x.y.z-win64.exe</filename> to install OVITO in a directory of your choice.
              Note that Windows might ask whether you really want to launch the installer, because it was downloaded from the web and it is not digitally signed.
            </para>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>

        <varlistentry>
          <term>macOS:</term>
          <listitem>
            <para>
              Double-click the downloaded <filename>.dmg</filename> disk image file to open it, agree to the program license, and drag the <filename>Ovito</filename> application bundle into your <filename>Applications</filename> folder.
              Then start OVITO by double-clicking the application bundle.
            </para>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>
      </variablelist>
    </simplesect>

    <simplesect>
      <title>Running OVITO on a remote machine</title>
      <para>
        Note that the OVITO desktop application cannot be run through an SSH connection using X11 forwarding mode, because it requires direct 
        access to the graphics hardware (so-called OpenGL direct rendering mode). 
        Thus, if you try to run <command>ovito</command> in an SSH terminal, you will likely get failure messages during program startup 
        or just a black application window. 
      </para>
      <para>
        It is possible, however, to run OVITO through an SSH connection using a VirtualGL + VNC setup.
        For further information, please see the <link xlink:href="https://www.virtualgl.org/">www.virtualgl.org</link> website.
        In this mode, OVITO will make use of the graphics hardware of the remote machine, which must be set up to allow running
        applications in a desktop environment. Please contact your local computing center staff to find out whether 
        this kind of remote visualization mode is supported by the HPC cluster you work on. 
      </para>
    </simplesect>

    <simplesect>
      <title>Installing the Python module</title>
      <para>
        The <emphasis>OVITO Pro</emphasis> program packages ship with an integrated Python interpreter ("<command>ovitos</command>") that gets installed alongside with the graphical desktop application,
        allowing you to execute Python scripts written for OVITO. 
        Optionally, it is possible to install OVITO as a Python module into an existing Python interpreter on your system in case you would like to make use of 
        OVITO's functionality in scripts written for other interpreters (e.g. the system Python interpreter or <emphasis>Anaconda</emphasis>).
        Please refer to the <pydoc-link href="introduction/running" anchor="installing-the-ovito-module-in-your-python-interpreter" no-pro-tag="1">scripting manual</pydoc-link> for more 
        information on the setup procedure.
      </para>
    </simplesect>

    <simplesect>
      <title>Troubleshooting</title>
      <para>
        If you run into any problems during the installation of OVITO, please contact us 
        via the <link xlink:href="https://www.ovito.org/forum/">online support forum</link>. The OVITO team will be happy to provide help.
      </para>
    </simplesect>

    <simplesect>
      <title>Building OVITO from source</title>
      <para>
        <emphasis>OVITO Basic</emphasis> is available under an Open Source license and you can download the source code 
        to build the program yourself, for example to develop new plugin functions for OVITO. 
        See the <link linkend="development">developers section</link> for further instructions.</para>
    </simplesect>

</chapter>
